Everyone wants in.
Look, welcome to our meeting here this afternoon.
We have you for a very short time, so I was wondering if you
wanted to make any comments to start with, and then we will head
straight to questions.
Thank you, Chair. I will make some very brief remarks in light of the very brief
session we have together.
Thanks very much for the opportunity to meet and talk about the work of the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
To my right, I have Janine Smith, who's DCE for Policy and Delivery,
and I've got my leadership team and chief financial officer here to answer any
questions of detail. I will keep it short.
I'll just say, as we look ahead into the estimates period, we've got a busy period.
We've got two major constitutional transitions, one with the general election,
second with the change of the Governor General, expected in
next year.
There are big pieces of work to support the transitions,
both of those situations, different parts of the department.
I don't need to tell you
about the volatility, complexity,
and acute risks that present themselves in the global environment, which
we watch closely. Severe weather and other natural hazards
present themselves more frequently.
Technology brings challenge, but also enormous opportunity.
So as a department, we think we are
well set to position ourselves to face into the year that's coming,
and to support the government of the day with its objectives and its
priorities. Thank you.
Great. Well, that was short. Thank you very much.
And I've got the first question from Camilla Belich.
Thank you. Nice to see you.
Nice to see you again.
I just have some questions around the budget for the forecast period.
DPMC has an increase in its budget for the forecast period, a
significant increase for its
budget. Can you let us know why DPMC has had a
budget increase when other departments-
Sure
... have been asked to have budget decreases?
That's a really good question. I'm glad you asked.
It is an increase in a technical
sense. The department has, for more than a decade, had
very irregular and uncertain funding structures.
So we have been host to a number of entities,
functions, and agencies, all of which have cross-subsidized us quite
significantly.
And we've had time-limited funding for many years
across a number of functions. So what we have here is, we've
done a baseline review and a transformation process.
We've gone through, confirmed the functions of the department,
put costs against them, and the government has agreed to give us
stable baseline funding going forward. So it is technically an increase.
We would say this underpins the funding for
the functions we need for the coming years.
Supplementary to that, one of the areas of increase has been 2.6 million
in increase for
advice and support services.
And
in relation to that particular line,
as part of that appropriation, do you have
responsibility for providing support to the Prime Minister's Office
in relation to answering OIA requests?
Yes, we do.
So if I can just ask some further questions around that.
Did DPMC provide support to the Prime Minister's Office
in response to the OIA from the Environmental Law Initiative
that was sent in May 2025 as
part of that responsibility?
Yes, we would have.
And what information
did DPMC provide to
the Prime Minister's office in how to respond to
that OIA?
I don't have the detail of that with me.
What I can say is we provide information that we have.
You'd have to direct questions about the Prime Minister's office to the Prime
Minister.
Well, this is the opportunity we have to-
Yes
... scrutinize
the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Yes.
We don't have the Prime Minister in front of us in any of these scrutiny weeks.
Yeah.
And it's an area that you have budget responsibility for.
We've received some information from written parliamentary questions that the Prime
Minister's former chief policy advisor provided information in an
OIA request. What was that information?
I don't have the detail of that with me. I'm sorry.
I'm very happy to come back to you in writing with detailed questions.
That would be very helpful if you could-
Yes
... come back to us with that.
The other
question that I had, and this is also in relation to written questions, so
information has been on notice, is
DPMC consulted on that OIA with the Honorable Judith
Collins' office on five separate occasions. Why was that?
I'm sorry, I-
Sorry. A point of order. Is that related to estimates
looking for the next four years? We did talk about the-
It's budget in relation to the budget that's just been increased-
Yeah
... in this particular line for advice and-
Yes, but you're not asking about why it's been increased.
You're asking why a particular conversation happened in the past,
or why a piece of information was passed in the past.
That's different to why are you seeking funding to conduct
these kind of things that might not be used.
Well, that might be where the questioning's going to.
But then it should-- Well, if that should go there, surely.
It's pretty hard to imagine a lot of funding involved.
The reason I'm asking these questions is I think this is important information
for the public record. It does relate to an
area that you've actually, one of the few departments that have received an
increase. And I think it's important for the committee to have transparency over
where that budget money is going. What does the Department of
Prime Minister and Cabinet do to assist the Prime Minister's office when they
receive OIA requests? And if you could provide that information to the
committee around stuff, that information you don't have today, that would be really
helpful.
Well, what I can say is I haven't come prepared, and I hope you appreciate I
haven't come prepared to answer specific questions of detail around
specific OIAs and in particular how they were put together.
That's not something that I- Have at my fingertips.
I can and will answer specific questions from you put
through as follow-up questions. No problem with that.
Thank you. And primary question from Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, the question I've got is one of the things which we, it might be a
relatively small question, but it's something that exercised our collective minds
quite a bit during the discussion on the Public Service Amendment bill,
and that was the future of long-term insights briefings.
And of course, you are now the proud custodians of being the only one that's
actually required. We did sort of take a lot of interest in what the
process you would go through to engage with other
government agencies to work out what were the key themes, et cetera.
You've already mentioned the dynamic environment in which
you operate. So my question is how are you going to go about
starting that process, what's your time frames, et cetera?
Yeah, it's an excellent question.
We are really looking forward to being the steward, if you like, for the system of
the long-term insights briefing.
It'll be one that it's a responsibility we'll take very seriously.
And I think the process will have to be, well, first of all,
drawing through
Janine and her team. She's got a great team of DCE policies which sit across the
system. But I think the key would be to identify an
issue which engages more than one department, engages the system, has
dependencies and horizontals, and actually will make a real
contribution to public debate
in New Zealand. So we'll, we've got...
It'll be in the next parliament under the Act.
Yes.
It will do it. And
it will be
a thoroughgoing consultation process amongst, across the public service and
obviously talking to a range of ministers about the sorts of things
that
we think we'll be doing. But again, this is our product.
Yeah.
It doesn't go through a minister for approval. We will present it to the House.
No, I understand. So, I'm pleased to hear that, pleased to hear the seriousness, et
cetera.
But the one bit that did sort of p***k my ears up there was you said one theme.
Now, of course, there's going to be a whole range of different things which may or
may not be connected, which may be really significant.
It's just that because that was the real concern that
many of us felt about the going from multiple to one.
Yeah.
Is that if you've only got one, that
big things get missed. The small bits, not a big deal, but big issues get
missed in that long-term insights briefing in terms of drawing attention to the
public and to
parliament for those issues.
Yeah. I guess I'd start by saying that
the long-term insights briefing is not the only
piece of analysis and foresight that gets done across the public service.
Actually, it's all of our responsibility to be thinking ahead and thinking about
what products we should be producing.
So for example, in the national security system, across 10
agencies, every three years, there's a national security strategy which engages
the full range of issues there. The National Resilience Board in the same way.
So there's a number of products that are already done on a regular basis.
The Treasury does a long-term fiscal-
Yes.
-briefing. So there's a range of products already.
So it's not like we've gone from many to one.
There are still many, and there will continue to be many.
In terms of the long-term insights briefing, I would think it would be broad.
Broad.
That would be my sense.
That's what I'd hoped you'd say.
It'll either be broad or very topical and very relevant.
So if I just took a couple of things off the top of my head, but this is just the
top of my head.
Yes.
AI
or technology and what that presents to the nation.
Climate change is an obvious one. So you just, you think of these, the big
rocks, the big policy challenges, or the big societal challenges that we
face. They are the sorts of things I think we would be wanting to square away
in a long-term insights briefing.
The other thing I'd add to that is there's existing infrastructure that we're
already using across our policy project, who has built a community
of strategic policy analysts who have actually
drawn together the long-term insight briefings across the successive
three years, and it will be building on those topics to be able to look
at what are the long-term issues that are facing our country
and what is cutting across from a system perspective,
using data and evidence to be able to present that back in the
consultation in relation to what is the topic that we choose.
No, thank you.
Okay, primary from-
Thanks. And if there's time, it would be good to hear a bit more about sort of use
of AI more broadly. But I wonder if I can ask you, I think last,
was it last year in estimates, it could've been in your review, you talked about
your new resilience function, and I wonder if you could tell us
how that's progressing, but specifically for this budget, what are the key sort of
lines of effort that it's going to fund?
Great. Well, thanks. Certainly, we are really pleased with the new
resilience function. I think you'll remember from the last
time we talked about it, I think it would've been estimates.
We basically used to have a baseline of about three working on these
areas, and I know
Camilla Belich worked closely with Minister Mitchell on the sort of on the national
emergency and the resilience area.
Mm.
We really felt we were underdone in terms of policy heft and capability and
thinking ahead again in the context that we're just discussing.
What are the things that are going to challenging us? What are the risks we face?
How are we as a system and as a nation ready to face them?
What resources do we have against them?
What is our residual risk,
and does that feel right looking in each individual pillar
and also across the system? Because obviously we don't have endless
resources to address each and every one.
So it is thinking about the spread and the way that you work across them.
So one of the big things that the resilience function has done is establish a
national risk and resilience framework that's gone to Cabinet.
I think it's December '24 was the first time
that paper went, the register went up last year, and we're in the
process right now
of going through and updating that.
So that takes each of the sort of risks, the hazards, and
the security issues, and basically does a traffic light
analysis of how we're positioned as a system across about seven or
eight domains.
That doesn't sound like much, but actually, it's a huge step forward in
understanding where we are at as a system and across
each risk. That's a really big part of the system.
The other thing we've done is reset the governance boards.
So, again, this is supported by the resilience function.
So we now have a high-level chapeau board, if you like, which is called
the National Resilience Board, which
other boards underneath it sort of report to.
That's responsible for oversight of the system and thinking about the
risks within them and the way they're managed.
So I think we've come a long way in a year.
The team's great. They're energetic and
really moving into the work in a really pleasing
way.
And that governance board that you just spoke about,
I think the first time you mentioned it, you said boards, but it's just the one
board. Or does that have a connection to some of those, or the two remaining sort
of what used to be cross-department boards?
Or can you just-
Sure. So you've got your National Resilience Board sits at the top.
You've got the National Security Board, which-
Yeah
... superintends the national security issues.
Yeah.
You've got a new National Emergency Management Board, which NEMA
obviously sits on, and NEMA is the representative into the Resilience Board.
And then we've got a sort of Environmental and Natural Hazards
Risk Board, which is, so if you think about who's on the National Resilience Board,
it's me as the chair of that board, but also as the National Security Board.
You've got NEMA there. Treasury's there because we need Treasury
there. They need to understand the scope of the
issues in front of us and how to fund them, what sort of funding is
necessary. And then
Environment, or it'll be MCERT now who's representing.
Does resilience sit over the top of the others or is it-
Yes. Well, it's not meant to be hierarchical, but the National
Resilience Board does superintend the framework, if you like.
Okay. Thank you.
Camilla, have you got...
I was just interested in, I think as Tim foreshadowed, some of your
AI projected spend within the forecast period,
and any safeguards that you'll be putting into place to ensure that that's done in
an appropriate, safe way considering you deal with such
high-level information.
Sure. We are
definitely moving ahead with AI adoption.
So right now we've got two pilots underway.
I won't mention the vendors because I won't give them free advertising.
But we've got two pilots of 50 people, which in our department is basically
half of the staff,
who are moving into a pilot over the next month.
We have a very good, strong policy framework, which we adapt
regularly. It's changed twice already this year.
So as you know, it's a fast-moving tech.
We are moving our policy framework.
We're just iterating it actively as we go.
We do have very strong safeguards.
We are custodians of national security information,
but also we are seized at the opportunity
presented, not just the risk. And I would say when we look at
this and we think about it,
New Zealand is actually not a leader in AI adoption, including in the government
space. There are many governments and systems well ahead of us, and we can
learn a lot from the way that they operate.
So we can and we are. So we've got very good frameworks and
systems and safeguards, but we're also really
committed as a department to making sure that we take the opportunity that
AI presents to help us be more efficient, to do
things,
to add value to the work our staff do.
And
just to give you an assurance that we require all work to be
viewed with a human eye, so people are at the center of our AI
journey.
The other thing that we're doing is also, as the home of the policy
project, we also have a number of pilots that we've got running across the public
service in relation to the policy departments and the application of AI within
those policy departments so that we can share those learnings across the public
service.
That does bring us to the end of a very short session. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
It didn't seem long enough. Thank you.
Thanks.